README.md, before:

# Security Incidents AI Query Agent

An AI agent that enables security analysts to query a PostgreSQL database of security incidents using natural language. This solution leverages Google's Vertex AI with the Gemini model to translate natural language queries into SQL, execute them, and return formatted responses.

## Architecture Overview

This solution consists of the following components:

1. **AI Query Engine**: Uses Vertex AI's Gemini model for natural language understanding and SQL generation
2. **Function Calling Interface**: Defines custom functions for Gemini to invoke for database operations
3. **Database Connector**: Handles communication with the PostgreSQL database
4. **Response Formatter**: Formats the query results into human-readable responses

---

### Architecture Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant CLI as CLI / Demo Script
    participant Agent as Security Incidents AI Agent
    participant Gemini as Gemini LLM (Vertex AI)
    participant DB as PostgreSQL Database

    User->>CLI: Enter natural language query
    CLI->>Agent: Passes query
    Agent->>Gemini: Sends prompt & context
    Gemini->>Agent: Function call (get_security_incidents_schema)
    Agent->>DB: SQL query (schema)
    DB-->>Agent: Schema info
    Agent->>Gemini: Returns schema
    Gemini->>Agent: Function call (query_security_incidents)
    Agent->>DB: SQL query (data)
    DB-->>Agent: Query results
    Agent->>Gemini: Returns query results
    Gemini->>Agent: AI response (final answer)
    Agent->>CLI: Formatted response
    CLI->>User: Display answer
```

---

## Features

- **Natural Language Understanding**: Understand complex security-related queries in plain English
- **SQL Generation**: Automatically converts natural language queries to SQL queries
- **Data Visualization Suggestions**: Recommends appropriate visualizations for the data
- **Context-Aware Responses**: Maintains context through conversations for follow-up questions
- **Security Focused**: Built with security best practices for handling sensitive security incident data

## Requirements

- Python 3.9+
- Google Cloud project with Vertex AI API enabled
- PostgreSQL database (version 11+)
- Service account with appropriate permissions

## Installation

1. Clone this repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/security-incidents-ai-agent
cd security-incidents-ai-agent
```

2. Install required packages:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Set up environment variables:
```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit the `.env` file with your configuration:
```
# Gemini API Key (replace with your actual key)
GEMINI_API_KEY="YOUR_GEMINI_API_KEY_HERE"

# Database Configuration
DB_HOST="localhost"       # Default: localhost
DB_PORT="5432"          # Default: 5432
DB_NAME="security"      # Default: security
DB_USER="postgres"      # Default: postgres
DB_PASSWORD="password"    # Default: password
DB_SCHEMA="public"        # Default: public (specify the database schema)
```

4. Set up the database:
This script will create the necessary tables and indexes. If you've set a custom `DB_SCHEMA` in your `.env` file, the script will use that schema.
```bash
python db_setup.py
```

## Usage

Run the demo script to interact with the agent:
```bash
python demo.py
```

---

### Streamlit Web UI

You can also interact with the Security Incidents AI Query Agent using a modern web interface powered by Streamlit.

#### Launch the Streamlit App

```bash
streamlit run streamlit_app.py
```

#### Features
- **Chat-based interface**: Ask questions about your security incidents database in natural language.
- **Example queries**: The UI suggests sample queries to help you get started.
- **Conversation history**: See your previous questions and the agent's responses in a chat format.
- **Technical details**: Expandable sections show the underlying SQL and debug logs for transparency.
- **Error handling**: Friendly error messages if the database or API is not configured.

#### What to Expect
- On launch, you'll see a welcome message and example queries.
- Type your question in the chat input at the bottom.
- The agent will respond with a concise summary and formatted results.
- You can expand technical details for each response to see how your query was processed.

---

### Example Queries

The agent can handle a wide range of natural language queries, such as:

- "What are all critical security incidents from the past week?"
- "Show me phishing attacks targeting the finance department"
- "List all unresolved security incidents assigned to John Smith"
- "How many malware incidents were reported by the IT department last quarter?"
- "Show me the trend of security incidents by category over the last 6 months"

## How It Works

### 1. Natural Language Processing

When a user submits a query in natural language, the agent sends it to the Vertex AI Gemini model with specific system instructions that help guide the model to understand security-related terminology and context.

### 2. Function Calling

The Gemini model is configured with two main function declarations:
- `get_security_incidents_schema`: Returns the schema of the security incidents table
- `query_security_incidents`: Executes a SQL query against the database

The model first calls `get_security_incidents_schema` to understand the available fields and their types, then generates an appropriate SQL query which it sends through the `query_security_incidents` function.

### 3. SQL Query Execution

The agent receives the SQL query generated by Gemini, executes it against the PostgreSQL database, and returns the results to the model.

### 4. Response Generation

Gemini then uses the query results to generate a natural language response that addresses the user's original question, including relevant insights, summaries, and suggested next steps.

## Security Considerations

This implementation includes several security features:

1. **SQL Injection Prevention**: Validation of SQL queries before execution
2. **Audit Logging**: Logging of all queries for security monitoring
3. **Access Control**: Support for role-based access control to limit what data can be queried
4. **Sensitive Data Handling**: Filtering out sensitive information from responses

## Customization

### Database Schema

You can customize the security incidents schema by modifying the `SECURITY_INCIDENTS_SCHEMA` dictionary in the main script. Be sure to update the database setup script accordingly.

### Model Configuration

You can adjust the Gemini model parameters in the `SecurityIncidentsAgent` class initialization within `app.py`. The default model in `app.py` is `gemini-2.0-flash`.

Example from `app.py`:
```python
class SecurityIncidentsAgent:
    def __init__(
        self,
        db_connector: DatabaseConnector,
        model_name: str = "gemini-2.0-flash", # Default model
        temperature: float = 0.2
    ):
        # ...
```

### System Instructions

You can customize the system instructions provided to the model by editing the `SYSTEM_INSTRUCTION` class attribute within the `SecurityIncidentsAgent` class in `app.py`.
```

Commit message:

Update README.md to reflect the use of Gemini API instead of Vertex AI, rename architecture diagram to sequence diagram, and add the sequence diagram image. Adjust descriptions for clarity and accuracy.

README.md, after:

# Security Incidents AI Query Agent

An AI agent that enables security analysts to query a PostgreSQL database of security incidents using natural language. This solution leverages Google's Gemini API to translate natural language queries into SQL, execute them, and return formatted responses.

## Architecture Overview

This solution consists of the following components:

1. **AI Query Engine**: Uses Gemini API for natural language understanding and SQL generation
2. **Function Calling Interface**: Defines custom functions for Gemini to invoke for database operations
3. **Database Connector**: Handles communication with the PostgreSQL database
4. **Response Formatter**: Formats the query results into human-readable responses

---

### Sequence Diagram

![Sequence Diagram](assets/images/sequence_diagram.png)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant UI as CLI / Streamlit Web UI
    participant Agent as Security Incidents AI Agent
    participant Gemini as Gemini LLM (Vertex AI)
    participant DB as PostgreSQL Database

    User->>UI: Enter natural language query
    UI->>Agent: Passes query
    Agent->>Gemini: Sends prompt & context
    Gemini->>Agent: Function call (get_security_incidents_schema)
    Agent->>DB: SQL query (schema)
    DB-->>Agent: Schema info
    Agent->>Gemini: Returns schema
    Gemini->>Agent: Function call (query_security_incidents)
    Agent->>DB: SQL query (data)
    DB-->>Agent: Query results
    Agent->>Gemini: Returns query results
    Gemini->>Agent: AI response (final answer)
    Agent->>UI: Formatted response
    UI->>User: Display answer
```

---

## Features

- **Natural Language Understanding**: Understand complex security-related queries in plain English
- **SQL Generation**: Automatically converts natural language queries to SQL queries
- **Data Visualization Suggestions**: Recommends appropriate visualizations for the data
- **Context-Aware Responses**: Maintains context through conversations for follow-up questions
- **Security Focused**: Built with security best practices for handling sensitive security incident data

## Requirements

- Python 3.9+
- Gemini API key from Google AI Studio (https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey)
- PostgreSQL database (version 11+)

## Installation

1. Clone this repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/security-incidents-ai-agent
cd security-incidents-ai-agent
```

2. Install required packages:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Set up environment variables:
```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit the `.env` file with your configuration:
```
# Gemini API Key (replace with your actual key)
GEMINI_API_KEY="YOUR_GEMINI_API_KEY_HERE"

# Database Configuration
DB_HOST="localhost"       # Default: localhost
DB_PORT="5432"          # Default: 5432
DB_NAME="security"      # Default: security
DB_USER="postgres"      # Default: postgres
DB_PASSWORD="password"    # Default: password
DB_SCHEMA="public"        # Default: public (specify the database schema)
```

4. Set up the database:
This script will create the necessary tables and indexes. If you've set a custom `DB_SCHEMA` in your `.env` file, the script will use that schema.
```bash
python db_setup.py
```

## Usage

Run the demo script to interact with the agent:
```bash
python demo.py
```

---

### Streamlit Web UI

You can also interact with the Security Incidents AI Query Agent using a modern web interface powered by Streamlit.

#### Launch the Streamlit App

```bash
streamlit run streamlit_app.py
```

#### Features
- **Chat-based interface**: Ask questions about your security incidents database in natural language.
- **Example queries**: The UI suggests sample queries to help you get started.
- **Conversation history**: See your previous questions and the agent's responses in a chat format.
- **Technical details**: Expandable sections show the underlying SQL and debug logs for transparency.
- **Error handling**: Friendly error messages if the database or API is not configured.

#### What to Expect
- On launch, you'll see a welcome message and example queries.
- Type your question in the chat input at the bottom.
- The agent will respond with a concise summary and formatted results.
- You can expand technical details for each response to see how your query was processed.

---

### Example Queries

The agent can handle a wide range of natural language queries, such as:

- "What are all critical security incidents from the past week?"
- "Show me phishing attacks targeting the finance department"
- "List all unresolved security incidents assigned to John Smith"
- "How many malware incidents were reported by the IT department last quarter?"
- "Show me the trend of security incidents by category over the last 6 months"

## How It Works

### 1. Natural Language Processing

When a user submits a query in natural language, the agent sends it to the Gemini API with specific system instructions that help guide the model to understand security-related terminology and context.

### 2. Function Calling

The Gemini model is configured with two main function declarations:
- `get_security_incidents_schema`: Returns the schema of the security incidents table
- `query_security_incidents`: Executes a SQL query against the database

The model first calls `get_security_incidents_schema` to understand the available fields and their types, then generates an appropriate SQL query which it sends through the `query_security_incidents` function.

### 3. SQL Query Execution

The agent receives the SQL query generated by Gemini, executes it against the PostgreSQL database, and returns the results to the model.

### 4. Response Generation

Gemini then uses the query results to generate a natural language response that addresses the user's original question, including relevant insights, summaries, and suggested next steps.

## Security Considerations

This implementation includes several security features:

1. **SQL Injection Prevention**: Validation of SQL queries before execution
2. **Audit Logging**: Logging of all queries for security monitoring
3. **Access Control**: Support for role-based access control to limit what data can be queried
4. **Sensitive Data Handling**: Filtering out sensitive information from responses

## Customization

### Database Schema

You can customize the security incidents schema by modifying the `SECURITY_INCIDENTS_SCHEMA` dictionary in the main script. Be sure to update the database setup script accordingly.

### Model Configuration

You can adjust the Gemini model parameters in the `SecurityIncidentsAgent` class initialization within `app.py`. The default model in `app.py` is `gemini-2.0-flash`.

Example from `app.py`:
```python
class SecurityIncidentsAgent:
    def __init__(
        self,
        db_connector: DatabaseConnector,
        model_name: str = "gemini-2.0-flash", # Default model
        temperature: float = 0.2
    ):
        # ...
```

### System Instructions

You can customize the system instructions provided to the model by editing the `SYSTEM_INSTRUCTION` class attribute within the `SecurityIncidentsAgent` class in `app.py`.
